[Unknown]: Welcome to the IVM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: A few days ago, I was walking down the boulevard when a man in a long black coat and a long
[Amit Varma]: black hat wearing dark glasses stepped in front of me and said, I know what you did
[Amit Varma]: last summer.
[Amit Varma]: I was surprised.
[Amit Varma]: I told him so even I know what I did last summer.
[Amit Varma]: The guy seemed surprised by that.
[Amit Varma]: He took a deep breath and then he said, I also know what you did last evening.
[Amit Varma]: He paused.
[Amit Varma]: Then he took out his phone and held it in front of my face.
[Amit Varma]: There was a picture of me in my underwear.
[Amit Varma]: And I won't tell you what else was in that picture.
[Amit Varma]: But I was shocked.
[Amit Varma]: How could you get this picture?
[Amit Varma]: I will complain to the police.
[Amit Varma]: Ha ha ha, he laughed like a maniac.
[Amit Varma]: If you go to the police, I will show them what you did last week.
[Amit Varma]: He swiped the screen and showed me what I did last week.
[Amit Varma]: I freaked out.
[Amit Varma]: I'm getting out of here, I said.
[Amit Varma]: Get away.
[Amit Varma]: But as I brushed past him, he laughed and said, you can't get away from me.
[Amit Varma]: For one thing, you can't run fast enough.
[Amit Varma]: You had 18 malai malpuas on Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: You have a BMI of 29.2.
[Amit Varma]: If you run now, you will be out of breath in 41.3 seconds.
[Amit Varma]: Remember what your doctor emailed you a month ago, your cholesterol level is too high for
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: I was angry now.
[Amit Varma]: Who are you?
[Amit Varma]: And how do you know so much about me?
[Amit Varma]: He replied, maybe I'm the government.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe I am you.
[Amit Varma]: At this point, he whipped off his tall black hat and dark glasses and I saw that he looked
[Amit Varma]: just like me, only a little more handsome.
[Amit Varma]: I almost fainted.
[Amit Varma]: What shit is this?
[Amit Varma]: Who are you?
[Amit Varma]: Didn't you hear me, he said, I am you.
[Amit Varma]: I have stolen your identity.
[Amit Varma]: You don't exist anymore.
[Amit Varma]: You are a ghost that walks.
[Amit Varma]: Muahahaha!!!
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and
[Unknown]: behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: the unseen. Everyone these days is talking about digital India. Digital India is this.
[Amit Varma]: Digital India is that. So much convenience. Let's go cashless. This is heaven on earth.
[Amit Varma]: Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Well, I have with me today on the show a man who would
[Amit Varma]: advise caution. Devanshu Dutta is a columnist based in Delhi who has written extensively
[Amit Varma]: on technology and economics. Devanshu, tell me, what are the downsides of digital India?
[Guest]: There are two major downsides. One is privacy and the other is data protection. They're
[Guest]: not exactly the same thing. Privacy leads into surveillance in the sense that there
[Guest]: could be an all-seeing, all-monitoring netra, as it's called, system which takes my data,
[Guest]: your data, collates our metadata, figures out, for instance, that we are sitting right
[Guest]: here right now using our various locational bits and pieces on the phone, and by inference
[Guest]: figures out that we must be either doing a podcast or some other kind of recording. That's
[Guest]: one level. The fact is that for a modern human being, if you're carrying anything like a,
[Guest]: let's say a metro smart card, or your phone is just switched on, you can be located pretty
[Guest]: much to within a hundred meters of wherever you are 24-7, which means if that data is
[Guest]: put together with other things, for example, if you visited a medical lab and you happen
[Guest]: to have searched online for, let us say, HIV tests, it doesn't require a great deal of
[Guest]: intelligence and a deep learning AI program could take this and say that, well, you know,
[Guest]: we have reason to believe that this man might have, you know, been interested in testing
[Guest]: for. So sensitive medical information can be inferred, even if it cannot be directly
[Guest]: proved. If you're using a card to pay for a medical test, a pathological test, then
[Guest]: we take that one step further. That's privacy. Let us say we need to define what is private
[Guest]: and what is not private in a more clear way. The second thing is criminal use of data.
[Guest]: If something like Aadhaar gets hacked, you could, first of all, shut down a lot of government
[Guest]: schemes. Secondly, you could do, you know, fairly nasty things like transfer huge sums
[Guest]: of money either into bank accounts or out of bank accounts. You could cause a completely
[Guest]: chaotic situation. You could potentially cause identity theft or you could swap identities.
[Guest]: For example, if your biometric information is swapped with my name and mine is swapped
[Guest]: with somebody else's name, you'll have complete hysteria up and down the line. Again, it's
[Guest]: not very clear A, what level of security exists to prevent such malicious acts happening.
[Guest]: And if something like that happens, it's not clear what kind of restitution would be available
[Guest]: for an affected entity. It might not be an individual, it could be a corporation which
[Guest]: got hit with something like this.
[Amit Varma]: So, I have two further lines of questioning from there. The first one is fairly trivial,
[Amit Varma]: but to go back to the privacy point, a lot of common Joes say that, look, the point about
[Amit Varma]: privacy matters if, say, you're a political dissident, like you and I might well be, and
[Amit Varma]: the government wants to shut down your free speech or whatever, then it matters that they
[Amit Varma]: can see where you are 24-7 and can, you know, spy on you. But for the common Joe, what is
[Amit Varma]: the big deal if various bots everywhere are figuring out their preferences and serving
[Amit Varma]: them more targeted ads?
[Guest]: Well, it can run into a problem in the sense that, for example, if you happen to have a
[Guest]: taste for eating beef, and you happen to have gone to Goa or Kerala or West Bengal, where
[Guest]: it is perfectly legal, and you have bought and cooked and eaten beef, and you come back
[Guest]: to Bombay, and your neighbor happens to get this information and decides to embarrass
[Guest]: you a lot by making it very public, you could run into social opprobrium. You might, for
[Guest]: example, have, you know, gone to a massage parlor in Delhi, which is again perfectly
[Guest]: legal, and you might have paid the masseuse an extra, something extra. Again, this is
[Guest]: perfectly legal, but it is also information that could be potentially embarrassing to
[Guest]: you. It is really no one else's business if I, if I choose to let, this is one of the
[Guest]: points many people make, it is my data, I would like to own it. If I choose to tell
[Guest]: Google that, hey, I happen to be at the crossing of SV Road and Linking Road, or I want to
[Guest]: know the nearest place where I can buy a bottle of wine, that's fine. I'm telling, I'm asking
[Guest]: for a certain amount of information, and you're welcome to make what you will of that information.
[Guest]: But I would like to be in control of my data. I would like to know how much of my data is
[Guest]: out there, and how much of it is digitally dispersed in different silos, and how much
[Guest]: of it is available at one spot to one all-seeing eye. Again, this is an example I'm taking
[Guest]: from a friend of mine, who is fairly wealthy, and since he drives an Audi, if he commits
[Guest]: a minor traffic infraction, he tends to get hit for huge sums in bribes. I drive a much
[Guest]: less upmarket car, and committing the same infractions, I get asked for smaller bribes.
[Guest]: This is the copper who's going by the fact that, well, making a judgment call that, fine,
[Guest]: this man is the owner of a very expensive car, so he can afford to pay a certain amount
[Guest]: more in the way of speed money. Now, if the copper actually had access to your PAN number
[Guest]: and your IT account, he could fine-tune his demands in a much more fine-grained fashion.
[Guest]: He could actually say that, well, you know, I know you've just withdrawn 15,000 rupees
[Guest]: from the ATM, and give me 10, as the case may be.
[Amit Varma]: So, for someone who's into rent-seeking, this is a feature, not a bug?
[Guest]: It is a feature, and the point is that it is also a feature which, if I was a black
[Guest]: hat, I would be rubbing my hands with glee because I could be into rent-seeking and get
[Guest]: into these systems and news runs somewhere. There's so much you can do.
[Guest]: There's so much you can do. Okay, my second question is really a two-part
[Amit Varma]: question. One is that countries which are further down this road than we are, what kind
[Amit Varma]: of safeguards typically have they put in place to protect both privacy and sensitive data?
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, what are we doing wrong? What more should we do?
[Guest]: I think the first thing, I think, is that you have to see data protection and security
[Guest]: as part of your essential infrastructure. It's just as essential as having a good high-speed
[Guest]: optic fiber line which can run at 20 Gbps or 60 Gbps or whatever.
[Guest]: It is as much part of your infrastructure as that.
[Guest]: If you put in the security and the precautions right at the beginning, it will not be patchwork.
[Guest]: It will be much more holistic and it will also be cheaper and more cost-effective.
[Guest]: Second things other countries have done, you start with the basics.
[Guest]: First you define what is sensitive data. Then you define who owns what, as in how much of
[Guest]: your personal data is actually your personal data and how much of it is stuff that, for
[Guest]: example, your PAN and your IT is known to the government on a need-to-know basis.
[Guest]: They are imposing taxes on you. They need to know your income.
[Guest]: However, only one specific department of the government needs to know your income.
[Guest]: That should not be accessible without a warrant to any other random government officer.
[Guest]: If there is no need for it, it should not be asked for and it should not be available
[Guest]: except under warrant. Second, you impose certain basic norms on
[Guest]: the guardians of that data. As of now, there is no punishment if, for
[Guest]: example, a hospital keeps its medical records unencrypted online.
[Guest]: We had an incident last week where somebody downloaded 43,000 path lab reports in Bombay
[Guest]: just to show that it was available and protected. Now that is sensitive information.
[Guest]: It affects insurance, it affects possibly friends and partners of the people who went
[Guest]: through those tests and it affects their careers. There is no legal liability for the lab in
[Guest]: question because it is not recognised under law as a breach.
[Guest]: You need to impose certain basic security considerations on guardians of this data and
[Guest]: that includes the government. In fact, the government is the biggest guardian
[Guest]: but on banks, on governments, on insurance companies who have to have a lot of sensitive
[Guest]: data on hand. They do have very carefully defined laws as
[Guest]: to what is sensitive data which includes things like location which are not considered sensitive
[Guest]: even in the most broadest of Indian laws. Your right to privacy does not include location.
[Guest]: In fact, the government has argued that privacy should not be a fundamental right but location
[Guest]: is not even considered sensitive. Your medical records are at least considered
[Guest]: sensitive. So nobody has an obligation to protect your
[Guest]: location. Google could sell your location if tomorrow
[Guest]: somebody wanted to know what does Amit Verma do. Google could say we don't really know
[Guest]: but 24-7 this is where he is and this is his weekly routine.
[Guest]: Other countries have then imposed certain basic security norms on guardians of that
[Guest]: data. They have to be kept in digitally secure worlds.
[Guest]: They have to be maintained with that security being upgraded as computer systems improve
[Guest]: because obviously yesterday's digital encryption is not good enough to last today.
[Guest]: And finally, there is restitution in the sense that if data is hacked and put online or there
[Guest]: is a breach, you can sue and the guardian in question will be forced to pay a certain
[Guest]: amount of compensation. There have been class action suits for example
[Guest]: every time that credit cards have got hacked in America.
[Guest]: Here in October you had 4 million odd debit cards being hacked across five different banks.
[Guest]: The question of restitution does not arise. I mean the banks will at best settle whatever
[Guest]: bills happen to be run up by the people who hacked those cards and they will issue new
[Guest]: cards but they can't be taken to the cleaners as they should be for having kept them in
[Guest]: an insecure way. So you need to impose those mandatory safeguards
[Guest]: and to punish people who do not maintain those mandatory safeguards and overall you need
[Guest]: a data protection law. We do not have a data protection law.
[Guest]: You need of course to define privacy. There should not be a scenario where to take
[Guest]: a very famous case, Nira Radia, the Radia tapes were leaked.
[Guest]: They were supposedly collected as evidence by a wing of the CBI.
[Guest]: They leaked. No one has really debated the authenticity
[Guest]: of those tapes. People have implicitly agreed that those tapes
[Guest]: were by and large authentic. They may have been fiddled with but by and
[Guest]: large they were authentic. They were gathered for an investigation which
[Guest]: went nowhere, some 50,000 hours worth of tapes were recorded and they were released.
[Guest]: Have you heard of a single policeman being even indicted for this rather than going to
[Guest]: jail? There are other laws of evidence.
[Guest]: If you walked into a police station and stole evidence which had been gathered in a physical
[Guest]: crime, let us say you took away all the weapons which had been gathered in a terrorist encounter,
[Guest]: you would be liable under law. So would the police for letting you have it.
[Amit Varma]: Now here, there is a much greater laxity because it is data.
[Guest]: Yes, and you know the buck. If the buck doesn't stop with the Home Minister,
[Guest]: does it stop with the Home Secretary, does it stop with the Commissioner of the Police
[Amit Varma]: Department which allowed this to happen, who does it stop with?
[Amit Varma]: Maybe in a cashless society there is no buck. Who does it stop with?
[Amit Varma]: So I have a further question, almost all of my data probably is saved with big companies
[Amit Varma]: like Google and Facebook. Now, do they have different policies in different
[Amit Varma]: countries to safeguard this data? How does it work?
[Guest]: Can you talk a little bit? They do have different policies in different
[Guest]: countries and they have, for example, Facebook and Google have run into a lot of problems
[Guest]: with the EU because the EU has much higher privacy standards than America even.
[Guest]: In certain cases, for example, Russia has insisted that if you are going to be running
[Guest]: services in Russia, you have to have your servers located in Russia which is, of course,
[Guest]: the big state surveillance thing because then they have much more control over being able
[Guest]: to suck data out of your servers. But yes, they comply with local privacy laws
[Guest]: where those laws exist. Now in India, in fact, it was people from
[Guest]: Google who told me that, well, you know, location data is not considered sensitive under Indian
[Guest]: law. And in other countries it is?
[Guest]: It is, of course, considered sensitive. I mean, it is obviously, I would have thought
[Guest]: this is completely self-evident that, you know, location data is sensitive.
[Guest]: It's only Indian law which, for some reason, when they made the initial IT Act, presumably
[Guest]: they did not think that location was possibly gettable. At that point of time, it wasn't
[Amit Varma]: common to be able to GPS. So would it be correct to say that at that
[Amit Varma]: point in time when the IT Act was put together, it was more an act of commission because they
[Guest]: didn't understand the implications well enough? Yes, possibly. But then you do need to update
[Guest]: and act like that. And so it's, you know, and you will, there will be other unforeseen
[Guest]: bits and pieces of data which become sensitive as things get more fine-grained.
[Amit Varma]: So without specifying what they are, you need to account for the possibility right now?
[Guest]: Yes. For example, you know, the whole thing about if I have a phone which is turned on
[Guest]: and if I have allowed an app access to my microphone, it is technically quite possible
[Guest]: for the app to be recording this conversation as we have it. And while it may not be very
[Guest]: easy right now, you have to allow for this possibility. And if you're writing a new law,
[Guest]: you have to have, let us say, a catch-all category which says any data which may become
[Guest]: sensitive in future. We are dealing with a science fictional situation that way.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a two-part question to follow up on that. Part one is that if you then had
[Amit Varma]: to update the IT Act or make laws regarding privacy, would you want to customize them
[Amit Varma]: to India or could you just say copy-paste from one of the European countries which has
[Amit Varma]: handled it well so far and they would suffice, number one? And the question number two is
[Amit Varma]: that what are the obstacles to these kind of reforms in India? Are there any obstacles?
[Amit Varma]: Is it just bureaucracy? Is somebody protecting their turf? What's the deal?
[Guest]: You could largely, I think, copy-paste from the EU's norms which are the most evolved
[Guest]: where these things are concerned. For example, EU even has something slightly controversial,
[Guest]: the right to forget, meaning you can ask a search engine for non-index information about
[Guest]: you. You might need to mildly tweak it for Indian context, but yes, I think that would
[Guest]: make a good working template. The second part of this, resistance to this,
[Guest]: I think is because of two things. One is there is reluctance on the part of India Inc., of
[Guest]: commercial start-ups, etc., to let these protections happen, because right now there are a lot
[Guest]: of commercially positive implications to being able to, for example, locate you.
[Guest]: Give me an example. Well, Zomato can figure out how many restaurants
[Guest]: will deliver to your exact area. Google can figure out whether you are more likely to
[Guest]: read military history or books on cooking, for example, two fairly common hobbies. So
[Guest]: there is a reluctance to let commerce be impeded by this. And at the government level, I think
[Guest]: there is a reluctance to have safeguards put on the government's ability to survey, to
[Guest]: track and survey people. For example, in theory, Britain has just put in an extremely regressive
[Guest]: surveillance act, which looks a bit odd because Britain also has fairly high privacy safeguards.
[Guest]: The point here is that Big Brother can watch you in Britain, but Big Brother also has to
[Guest]: get an okay from his Big Brother. So there is a chain of potential consequences.
[Guest]: We don't have those safeguards. We don't have those safeguards, and I don't
[Guest]: think the government would like to have those safeguards. Right now, as it stands, a verbal
[Guest]: order from a policeman of, you know, any IPS officer, basically, can give a verbal order
[Amit Varma]: saying put a tap on this guy's, you know. And I suppose this is especially a worry as
[Amit Varma]: we get more and more authoritarian, and a classic example of that which comes to mind
[Amit Varma]: is the leak about Teesta Settlebadh using her credit card to buy alcohol, which is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, again, a massive breach of privacy. And it's besides being completely irrelevant
[Guest]: to anything. It is purely an attempt to embarrass somebody
[Guest]: who is a critic of the government. And yes, I mean, if her credit card had been used to
[Guest]: buy whatever birth control pills or whatever, again, and the fact is that, again, that that
[Guest]: leak was happened with impunity, because the government has every right to collect financial
[Guest]: information on you, specifically, in a case where it suspects that, you know, you have
[Guest]: financial improprieties, involving a tax, an organization which is, which gets tax breaks,
[Guest]: it has every right to collect that information. As the law stands, it also has the right to
[Guest]: dump it in public domain to in order to embarrass you. If you had a privacy law, you this was
[Guest]: at an open, in fact, the example you use was open press conferences. It wasn't hush hush.
[Guest]: Take it wasn't like it wasn't hush hush. Take it out the side door. It was so you know,
[Amit Varma]: it has a right to embarrass you. So one final question for you. I mean, we are ending this
[Amit Varma]: episode on a slightly pessimistic note, because it's obvious that there are powerful interests
[Amit Varma]: such as a government and big corporates ranged against giving us a kind of privacy and data
[Amit Varma]: protection that we might want. But my question to you is that as an individual user and as
[Amit Varma]: an individual generator of data, so to say, what can we do as best as we can to safeguard
[Guest]: our interests? There's a level of individual security, which you can put in to try and
[Guest]: see that your own communications are not, for example, use email, which has fairly strong
[Guest]: encryption, use something like Signal or WhatsApp, which is end to end encryption, encryption.
[Guest]: Beyond the point, you can't because you're engaged with a banking system. This is an
[Guest]: example I've used increasingly in conversations in the last couple of weeks after demonetization
[Guest]: happened that, well, you know, as the government says, it is very easy to transfer money into
[Guest]: your account using a direct benefit for gas subsidies and MNREGA, etc. It is equally easy
[Guest]: to transfer the money out. Right. And assuming you're engaged with the economy in any given
[Guest]: way, unfortunately, you are at, without laws, you are entirely at the mercy of the government
[Guest]: if it decides tomorrow at its discretion to transfer money out of your account. So a cashless
[Guest]: economy, in a sense, is the end of freedom. It is. In that sense, it is very much the
[Guest]: end of freedom. You are, I mean, you're talking about electronic bytes. If there is no law
[Guest]: to protect that data, and it might not even be the government, it could be a clever hackers
[Amit Varma]: collective.
[Amit Varma]: Devanshu, thanks a lot for being on the show. And in case Big Brother is listening in, hey,
[Amit Varma]: Big Brother, what's up? Thanks. You're welcome. Talking to Devanshu made me wonder why I call
[Amit Varma]: the show the seen and the unseen. In the times we live in, can anything really be unseen?
[Amit Varma]: Having said that, in this shallow age of short attention spans, can anything even be seen?
[Amit Varma]: Maybe there's no seen, maybe there's no unseen. That's an apt philosophical note on which
[Unknown]: to end this episode. See you next week.
[Unknown]: Next week on the seen and the unseen, Amit Varma will be talking to Alex Tabarrok about
[Unknown]: Floor Space Index or FSI. For more, go to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the seen and the unseen, check out this exciting new podcast
[Amit Varma]: from IndusVox Media called Keeping It Queer. Keeping It Queer is hosted by my friend Naveen
[Amit Varma]: Narona, and he profiles LGBT people from all across the country, and some of the stories
[Amit Varma]: are really poignant. Check it out on Audioboom or iTunes.
[Unknown]: Hi, this is Amit Doshi, and I wanted to thank each and every one of our listeners. It's
[Unknown]: been two years since I founded IVM, and it's been an amazing two years. We wanted to learn
[Unknown]: a little bit more about who is listening to our shows, and so we put together a short
[Unknown]: survey. The survey is anonymous, and we aren't going to be collecting any personal information.
[Unknown]: I would really appreciate it if you could take a couple of minutes out of your day and
[Unknown]: go to ivmpodcasts.com slash survey and fill it out. Thanks, and please keep listening.
[Unknown]: Hey, man, just help me out, man. I need some podcast, man. I haven't had a fix in a week.
[Unknown]: I just need some. Don't you worry about it. I got podcasts
[Amit Varma]: galore for you, man. Just go to ivmpodcasts.com. You can also find us on Facebook, Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: and Instagram. Thanks, man. I'm going to check it out.